# Patrick O'Malley's Technical Journal

Journal 1

I spent two hours doing a datacamp.com lesson on the terminal. I learned again to ask where I am in the terminal and how to identify files and directories. I moved directories and copied, moved, renamed and deleted files. I learned how to view a file’s contents overall and piece by piece. I learned about looking at the start of a file and the tail. I learned about the “less” command. I also learned how to select columns from data that I wanted to see. I spent another two hours going through the tutorial on the command line twice that is in the syllabus. My question is that when I opened my cheat-sheet.txt file from my desktop, there was nothing in it, it was just an empty file. But when I asked the terminal what its contents were, it told me what I had put into it. 


Journal 2

I tried to use Learn Python the Hard Way for an hour, but I ran into problems because it said that you needed Python 2 and I have Python 3 on my system. I read “What is Python Used For?” And spent about 2 hours in a Python tutorial on datacamp.com. I learned Python basics like the interface and when to use Python. I learned how it could be used as a calculator and also the variables and types and how to assign. I started playing around with lists, like creating different types. There was a section on lists of lists. I also have a few Python books that I spent about an hour reading through just to get familiar with the terminology. 

Journal 3

I thought a little bit outside the box this week. I really want to gain familiarity with textual analysis, so beyond the required readings, I read numerous others on topic modeling (one by Lisa Rhody on figurative language in poetry and topic modeling), basic algorithms, and textual analysis for marketing. I revisited my data camp Python course to solidify things I already learned. Also, I was very moved by the readings on accessibility this week, and it got me thinking of accessible copy on sites and apps. I wants to start working as a freelance writer, so I took a two hour class on copywriting and SEO. Makes me think of all the ways I could create copy that is readily available to all people (also I really liked the article about using HTML friendly coding for all sites, so that changes the way I would write too). One thing I considered is writing without nuance for copy, because that makes it harder for people like the young man in the case study chapter with autism to understand, and also affects translatability into other languages for the Hispanic woman. I wonder, Patrick, in your experience with assistive reading devices if nuance gets difficult to interpret or if that is not a problem for you based on your expertise with English? I only wonder because I know they read rather fast, and I just wonder how difficult it is to retain everything read to you? One last thing I did was begin the CSS/HTML course on Khan Academy. 


<b>BONUS</b> Journal for missing class last Wednesday because of weather

Hour 1: Worked on the Khan Academy HTML/CSS tutorial. Played with Git until I figured out how to post my journal.

Hour 2: W3schools tutorial on HTML… (went from HTML HOME to HTML CSS)

Questions on HTML: The Khan Academy course said that an image needs to be defined by a URL and cannot exist on your own computer solely, but the w3schools course used a JPG locally. Do you know what I am missing?

Does using <h1> - <h6> always make the headings smaller in size as the page goes down? Do you need to specify with style=“font-size: Xpx;”>     or, can you just re-use h1 and h2 over and over again so they are the same size?

Do you know if there is a “View page source” in Safari? Same with “Inspect element”

When would you use <b>  vs.  <strong> and also <i> vs. <em> ? The w3schools course says the latter two are used when there is “semantic importance” but they seems to do the same thing. Or that the text is “important,” so what does “important” mean to the browser if you just really want it to be bold or italic?

Hour 3: W3schools tutorial on HTML (HTML Links to HTML Layout). I don’t have any questions… the code got much more intense here so I skimmed through just to know what HTML is capable of so that I can refer back later. This is definitely a useful resource!!

Hour 4: W3schools tutorial (HTML Responsive to HTML Input Attributes)



Journal 4   February 21-27

Hour 1: Python tutorial on datacamp. I learned about lists. I have questions about slicing, or subsetting.

Hour 2: Python tutorial on datacamp. Lists of lists and manipulating lists. Changing elements of list of lists is intense, but appears manageable on the surface level…. There is just so many different ways to do it. 

Hour 3: W3schools tutorial (HTML5 module). I am a little confused about how HTML 5 works with other versions of HTML (but in going through the HTML5 module, the HTML5 Migration section addresses some of this).  But it seems like there is a lot of room for flexibility for incorporating different forms of media. The <article> and <section> elements, and how they are used together, is hard to wrap my head around. 

Hour 4: W3schools tutorial (HTML graphics module, HTML APIs, HTML Examples modules). I would like to understand more how the Canvas element stores graphics made in JavaScript and how you do that and pull them to use later in HTML. I am beginning to be able to see the difference between Canvas and SVG. 

Hour 5: Python tutorial on datacamp. Functions and Packages. I’d like to learn more about the functions they did not go into detail about in this tutorial, or what all Python is capable of. I’d love a Python tutorial similar to the W3schools tutorial on HTML.

Journal 5

Hour 1: W3 Schools Python Tutorial. Python HOME to Python Tuples
Hour 2: W3 Schools Python, Sets - Inheritance
Hour 3: Started going through the presentations from my previous programming class at NYU. Touched on the fundamentals of programming and Python language. From programming work flow to values and types to operations and variables to user input. I was very overwhelmed with this course at the time, but now that I know more about Python and other languages, it is very valuable. 
Hour 4: Studying new book, Exploratory Programming for the Arts and Humanities (MIT Press) by Nick Montfort. The introduction was very compelling. Montfort discusses two notions, “creative computing” and “programming as inquiry.” The two are both similar and differential. “Creative computing” refers to programs that further the boundaries of art and using the computer as a cultural medium to expand the possibilities of technology, seen in bots, interactive literary texts and visualizations. “Programming as inquiry” though, refers to using data to “come up with new ideas.” From a low-level perspective such as my own, I am more intrigued by the latter, as it seems to pertain more to interests in literature, despite the former’s example of interactive literary texts. However, the author points out that the two are not mutually exclusive and lend oneself to the other in most cases: “A program developed for humanistic inquiry about data is itself a creative production, a digital artifact representing a new way of thinking. A program to generate texts or to show a visual animation is also an exploration, an inquiry, into how words fit together and how shape, line, and color work with one another in motion.” The design of such projects, regardless of where it would fit within this overlapping framework, is a compelling drive to work towards. It is easy to get lost in the sauce of learning programming languages like Python, but reading works such as Montfort’s grounds the purpose of my inquiry and is reassuring in that countless others have been in this overwhelming position before and gone on to pursue wildly innovative research and projects. What is more is that I very much appreciate how the focus of this book zeroes in on both the arts and humanities; while I am mostly interested in the discourse of literary theory and comparative literature in a humanistic sense, I am also fascinated by the possibilities, limits, fundamentals… overall working of formal design in the arts. The two are also not mutually exclusive, and understanding one also furthers abilities in the other. Technology is an excellent fusion of the two, and a means to work within both fields. 

Journal 6:

Hour 1: Exploratory Programming for the Arts and Humanities. There were several chapters on the fundamentals of Python and the various libraries the book suggests installing. Also a recap of the command line, which is helpful because I haven’t read up on that since the beginning of the semester. I was reminded that copying the source code from View Source and pasting and saving it in a text editor stores a website locally. The author discusses editing the locally saved file and changing text, which I suppose is obvious that you could do but I hadn’t really thought about it. He talks about how editing the beginning of the line that is not a string, which does hose the operation. Helpful to think about the differences between code and data. There were some good examples of syntax errors in a chapter so related that were useful to look over. Then he distinguishes that to semantic errors related to problems of expression or meaning. I like reading about valid and intentional programs, which the latter is defined as being distinguished from a program that needs to be revised as opposed to matches present goals. However it would seem that by consistently tweaking programs and goals, this process is never really complete. 

Hour 2: NYU Python class resources. Format() function was explained in detail. Format() returns a string, but can also take in numeric characters. Read of idioms which I don’t remember at all from that class (in retrospect, this class for beginners was very poorly designed! Too many formalities up front and not enough foundational basics, thanks for not being this class Patrick Smyth!)… makes sense though (idioms) in that I remember being lectured on doing things the hard way in Python…. Writing many lines of code that could have been encapsulated Into functions. Then the module goes on to discuss style in code, which would also be related. PEP 8 and its proposals is explained, which seem to make for common sense coding diction. I like that someone thought this through sensibly!

Hour 3: NYU Python class resources. Hardcoding helps not having to write things multiple times. Idiomatic is Pythonic… I like that word! Also the term Pythonista!! Indentation has historically confused me, so I was grateful in going over the importance of this syntax. Comparison operators are helpful to look through again.I never knew (didn’t realize/remember) the three logical operators are “and,” “or” and “not” for Booleans. The module goes over truth tables of Boolean values and operands but I am not really certain why this would be used. The module shows really complex Boolean concepts like 100 > 1 and -10 ** 2 <= -100 or "foo" == "foo" + "bar" which is True. I also didn’t remember there was an operator precedence like PMDAS in math class! Obviously that makes sense though. Short circuit evaluation claims that if the left side of the boolean decides outcome then stop with the rest of the expression but that seems pretty self explanatory so I don’t know why it has a fancy term. 

Hour 4: 


imperative (Variables, functions) Object oriented programming (attribute is a variable inside an OOP, method is a function inside OOP). If-And statements…. Worked with if statements within another If statement, which was new to me. Elif statements make the program run faster because there is less to compile, so that is useful. Logical operators are tedious but are good to realize they exist… (not > is the same as <=, not < is the same as >=). Truth tables (Morgan’s Law) came back, again still weird to wrap my head around entirely but they make sense. I can see how them and logical opposites ties together. More elegant to test intrinsic truth values than using equality operator. 






Journal 7:

Hour 1: NYU. Modules are defined and it is much easier to think of them when spelled out as files of functions. They are less intimidating this way. PYTHON_PATH helps us locate modules so that is a good resource. I remember using turtle before, which was the fun pen-plotter. Python has so many different elements that we learned about in this class it is really great to get reacquainted with them. I will have to spend more time another day looking through the many modules in the documentation. String formatting with % is a really cool way to concatenate in a new way, instead of relying on +. This helps code become more dynamic than static it seems. He also explained how to use more than one % and make it work the code use the different placeholders. 

Hour 2: While loops are another good way to consolidate code. I did not remember that the terms iteration and loop can be used interchangeably. I also maintained and mutated the state on loop iteration, I can see how this can be done very frequently. I practiced accumulating values. I relearned condition-controlled and count-controlled loops. This is pretty obvious but its good to be reacquainted with terminology. In terms of terms, I also went over what is in a For loop… keyword, loop variable and itterable object. And a colon! An accumulator variable is a variable used to keep the running total of a repeated calculation or operation that's within a loop. Nested loops using for and while loops in tandem gets differing loops to work in tandem.

Hour 3: Functions are valuable because they reduce extraneous code and break down programming into specific and easy to follow tasks (so long as you know how to read it). You don’t have to deal with a program in its entirety when there are functions so it is easier cleanup if you mess something up. When you have such dynamic problems as you do in programming, knowing how and when to use programs empowers you to be creative in how you solve these problems. Another good point is how when you have individual functions in a collective program, you are easily able to test the functions out on their own and at different times. Parameters specify what information must be provided to the function, which makes you realize how good it is that Python is written in such a reliable language. What something is saying can easily be understood by comprehending the underlying logic. The indention of functions is very helpful, however this used to be a major source of stress for me. 

Hour 4: Scope determines where a variable is accessible. Scope is not something I remember covering at all, but from what I gather of all his explanations and examples is that it stores name and values of variables. Global scope is defined top level of indentation and can be called anywhere in the function. Local scope is different and are defined inside the function, indented. They can only be called (locally) inside the function. Declaring variables locally puts that variable first, and you can name it the same thing globally and the two act as separate variables, meaning neither overrides the other. They both print when you call the name just once. Assertions are a means of testing a program to check for values. You write {{assert “ string “ == function_name (comma, separated, string)}}. This tests specific portions of program so you don’t have to do it manually. They can be turned off too when running program and do a trusty job in checking overall state of program. 




Journal 8

Hour 1:  NYU course. In lists, count returns the number of occurrences of an element. And index gives back the index of the first occurrence of an element. Also learned that strings are called compound data types, meaning there are 0 or more other values… I’d like to know what else is a compound data type. And a characters place in a string is its index based on its location. Strings and mutable though, and you cannot change values by indexing. Also can’t set index equal to another character. To “do stuff” with strings, use a for loop! Much more convenient than indexing. Substring slicing is a cool trick to pull certain characters away from strings. Using “in” or “not in” helps look for certain characters too. An object is a thing that a variable name can refer to, like a string or integer. Methods are functions associated with specific objects. So basically methods are behaviors that objects undertake or do. 

Hour 2: Standard for consistently representing text through different character sets and encodings is unicode. It uses code points and Python can translate code points to characters and vise versa using chr() and ord(). New chapter… learning about exceptions now which are errors occurring in runtime. I’ve come across these many times.  In Python, we can see which file, line number, the code that caused the exception and also which kind or exception or error which are zero division, index, type, name and value. Tuples are like immutable lists that hold strs, lists, ints, other tuples…. The other tuples part gets intense I do remember that. But you can’t add, remove or change items in it. A tuple is a sequence type so it has some operations that are similar to strings and lists but it still doesn’t support everything. Tuples are faster than lists for some operations. They are good returning multiple values in a function. 

Hour 3: Compound types are values that are made up of other values. Sequence types are strings, lists and tuple that I learned about so far. Mapping type is another which is a data type that is made of a collection of keys and values and Python’s answer to this is a dictionary, which are unordered collection of key/value pairs. Dictionaries use {} and comma to separate and colons to link. The get method retrieves values from dictionaries. Dictionaries are also mutable and unordered. OSX Paths… directories reference other files. Root is top most directory and contains all other files and directories. Pathname specifies unique location within a file system. I am glad we have been working with terminal so much in our class, because when I took NYU class I was trying to learn this all for the first time amongst Python which was overwhelming. A path separator is a character that's used to join together each directory in a pathname that contains nested directories, ie “/.” Absolute paths are paths expressed as starting from root whereas relative paths are paths expressed as relative from the current working directory.

Hour 4: Main memory and RAM is volatile memory, or memory that requires an electrical current to maintain state. Non-volatile memory can do this without electrical current, like hard drives, flash drives, CDs and DVDs. Data may go away at the end of the program, or when computer gets turned off and if you're working with large amounts of data, you may run out of RAM… which is typically less than the amount of non-volatile memory that you have. Python has a built-in function called open, which opens a file. It can be used for reading or writing and takes two arguments: a filename and a mode and returns a file object. File objects allow programs to manipulate/read/write to an actual file on disk. In open() … a mode of 'w' means that the file will be opened for writing, if the file doesn't exist, 'w' will create it, if the file exists, 'w' will overwrite it! write(s)… does not automatically add new lines and takes a string as an argument. Non-string arguments result in an error. file_obj.close() closes a file and if you don’t do then file may not be written to. With a file object, you can read the contents of a file by using one of the following methods on your file handle object like iterating over the file object itself using a for loop… or, using readline(), readlines(), or read(). Read/readlines consumes more memory because it reads the entire file at once.







Journal 9:

Hour 1: NYU. Named tuples, classes and objects. Dealing with entirely separate variables only works for a handful of coordinates, the bracket syntax for using dictionaries, lists and tuples is a bit cumbersome so you could use named tuples. They assign meaning to each position in a tuple, allow for more readable, self-documenting code, can be used wherever regular tuples are used and add the ability to access fields by name instead of position index. Using namedtuple in the collections module, you can define a tuple with each position named based on your own specifications. The arguments that you pass to namedtuple are typedname and field_names. And then you can use Point to create named tuples that have x and y values. Namedtuple returns a new type, the type's name is the argument that's passed in, 'Point,” and the variable name Point is bound to the new type created and creates Point objects. Classes is another way of type, and this could be better than named tuples which are immutable and leaves you with methods defined as tuples. A constructor method determines what happens when an object is created. self refers to the new object that the constructor will create. You can add data to the self object by using the dot operator and assignment.

Hour 2: In addition to creating classes with constructors, methods, and instance variables you can also use static variables, static methods, and magic methods. Static variables are ariables that can be accessed without an instance, but still defined in a class. Static methods are methods that can be called without an instance, but still defined in a class. Magic methods are special methods that you can implement to add specific functionality to a class. "Static" / class variables are properties that you can access with or without an instance. The value for a static variable remains the same for all instances. Same for “static” methods. Magic methods are methods that add defined functionality to a class. gcf is defined as a static method because it's possible to call this outside of the context of a fraction object. Methods and instance variables from the original (base/parent class) will exist in the sub class (child class) without those methods and instances having to be explicitly defined. 

Hour 3: Dealing with different formats. 	You create a reader object and you just loop over it and each row is a list of strings (regardless of content) in a csv. With csv you can specify the dialect (like there's a specific way that Excel creates csvs), change delimiter, change quote char, etc. Reader object is created by calling csv.reader and passing in a file object and you can loop to run. When writing to a fixed width file though, some data may be longer than the actual width allowed in fixed width fields and the data will have to be truncated. If its shorter, it has to be padded. With HTML, XML and JSON, its easiest to find somebody else’s library who already dealt with the hierarchical and non column based elements because html is difficult to parse. So you could find an html parser already built. You can find elements within an html document with methods. 


Hour 4: API stands for Application Programmer Interface and is basically set of tools that help develop an application. Some sites offer an API to access their data like NY Times. apis usually require some sort of authentication, and that authentication can be as a simple as a unique key assigned to your program. To use api 	read documentation, determine authorization (usually request a token), make an http request to the appropriate url to retrieve data, and parse the data (usually json). A digital image is just a collection of pixels and pixels are arranged in a 2-dimensional grid. Rectangles of pixel data are also called raster images. More pixels means more detail and higher resolution. Each pixel has a color usually represented by some combination of red, green and blue. A pixel's color is determined by the amounts of primary colors that its composed of. intensity is the amount of a particular primary color component and can range from 0 to 255. Red first, green second, and blue last. A pixel that has 0 intensity for all primary colors is black and 255 for each is white. You could use PIL to work with images. 